docs: signals in Oryx (#1989)
spryker/spryker-docs: docs/scos/dev/front-end-development/202212.0/oryx/reactivity/signals.md

# Oryx Framework - Signals

## Overview

Signals are a crucial tool within the Oryx framework, offering a clean and efficient reactivity API for components. They allow for the declarative formulation of component logic while seamlessly integrating with observables from domain services.

## Implementation of Signals in Oryx

The Oryx implementation of signals has a core mechanism and a simplified API. The core is well-suited for advanced usage, while the simplified API is sufficiently robust for most components. This documentation will focus on the simplified API.

### Creating Signals

To create a signal, use the `signal()` function. This function can either take a raw value or accept an observable.

Here's an example of creating a simple signal:

```ts
const counter = signal(1);
```

Changing the signal value:

```ts
counter.set(2);
```

Creating a signal from an observable:

```ts
const values = signal(observable$);
```

You can initialize signals with options to adjust their behavior:

> - `equal` function:This option allows you to compare two values and determine their equality. It's a function that takes two inputs and returns true if they're equal and false if not. This is particularly useful when you want to control when the signal updates. By defining how values are considered equal, you can prevent unnecessary updates when the new value is effectively the same as the old one, according to your equality logic. This can help improve performance by reducing redundant computations and re-renders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `equal` function: This option allows you to compare two values and determine their equality. It's a function that takes two inputs and returns true if they're equal and false if not. This is particularly useful when you want to control when the signal updates. By defining how values are considered equal, you can prevent unnecessary updates when the new value is effectively the same as the old one, according to your equality logic. This can help improve performance by reducing redundant computations and re-renders.
```

Is there no standard comparison done to detect if the new value equals the previous value?

Author: there is, updated

```

### Computed Signals

A computed signal derives its value from other signals. It automatically reevaluates its value when any of the signals it depends on changes.

Here's an example of a computed signal:

```ts
const counter = computed(() => 3 * counter(1));
```

Computed signals can also convert observables to signals transparently:

```ts
const counter = computed(() => productService.get({ sku: productSku() }));
```

In the example above, `productSku` is a signal, and `productService.get` returns an observable.

Computed signals can use the same set of options as regular signals.

### Effects

Effects are functions that run whenever a signal's value changes.

Here's an example:

```ts
const counter = effect(() => {
    console.log('counter changed', counter());
});
```

You can configure effects using options to modify their behavior:

- `defer`: If this is set to true, your effect won't run until you explicitly call the `start()` method.
- `async`: Set this to true if you want your effect to run asynchronously.

Example:

```ts
const counter = effect(() => {
    console.log('counter changed', counter());
}, { defer: true, async: true });
```

> ### Using Signals in Components

Reviewer: can we also provide a section on elementEffect? Or wire it in the effect section? Or combine it in this section?

Author: good point, forgot about it 🤦

# Oryx Framework - Signals

## Overview

> Signals are crucial tools within the Oryx framework, offering a clean and efficient reactivity API for component design. They allow for the declarative formulation of component logic while seamlessly integrating with observables from domain services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signals are a crucial tools within the Oryx framework, offering a clean and efficient reactivity API for components. They allow for the declarative formulation of component logic while seamlessly integrating with observables from domain services.
```

Author: 👍

## Implementation of Signals in Oryx

The Oryx implementation of signals has a core mechanism and a simplified API. The core is well-suited for advanced usage, while the simplified API is sufficiently robust for most components. This documentation will focus on the simplified API.

### Creating Signals

To create a signal, use the `signal()` function. This function can either take a raw value or accept an observable.

Here's an example of creating a simple signal:

```ts
const counter = signal(1);
```

Changing the signal value:

```ts
counter.set(2);
```

Creating a signal from an observable:

```ts
const values = signal(observable$);
```

#### Signal Options

> Signal options are settings that you can use to customize your signals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Signal options can be used to customize your signals.
```

Author: 👍

> - `equal` function: This option allows you to compare two values and decide if they are equal. It's a function that takes two inputs and should return true if they are equal and false if they're not.

Reviewer: can you add small explanation why this is needed?

Author: 👍

- `initialValue` option: This is used when creating a signal from an observable. It sets the first value of the signal, so you don't have to wait for the observable to give a value.

Here's an example of using options:

```ts
const values = signal(observable$, { initialValue: 1, equal: (a, b) => a === b });
```

### Computed Signals

A computed signal derives its value from other signals. It automatically reevaluates its value when any of the signals it depends on changes.

Here's an example of a computed signal:

```ts
const counter = computed(() => 3 * counter(1));
```

Computed signals can also convert observables to signals transparently:

```ts
const counter = computed(() => productService.get({ sku: productSku() }));
```

In the example above, `productSku` is a signal, and `productService.get` returns an observable.

Computed signals can use the same set of options as regular signals.

### Effects

Effects are functions that run whenever a signal's value changes.

Here's an example:

```ts
const counter = effect(() => {
    console.log('counter changed', counter());
});
```

> #### Effect Options

Reviewer: What about leaving out this addition 4-level header, and just keep writing in the text?

Author: 👍

> Effect options let you adjust how your effects function.

Reviewer: is this a proper sentence?

Author: rephrased + dropped header

- `initialValue` option: This is used when creating a signal from an observable. It sets the first value of the signal, so you don't have to wait for the observable to give a value.

Here's an example of using options:

```ts
const values = signal(observable$, { initialValue: 1, equal: (a, b) => a === b });
```

### Computed Signals

A computed signal derives its value from other signals. It automatically reevaluates its value when any of the signals it depends on changes.

Here's an example of a computed signal:

```ts
const counter = computed(() => 3 * counter(1));
```

Computed signals can also convert observables to signals transparently:

```ts
const counter = computed(() => productService.get({ sku: productSku() }));
```

In the example above, `productSku` is a signal, and `productService.get` returns an observable.

Computed signals can use the same set of options as regular signals.

### Effects

Effects are functions that run whenever a signal's value changes.

Here's an example:

```ts
const counter = effect(() => {
    console.log('counter changed', counter());
});
```

You can configure effects using options to modify their behavior:

> - `defer`: If this is set to true, your effect won't run until you explicitly call the `start()` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `defer`: If this is set to `true`, your effect doesn't run until you explicitly call the `start()` method.
```

> - `async`: Set this to true if you want your effect to run asynchronously.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `async`: Set this to `true` if you want your effect to run asynchronously.
```

Example:

```ts
const counter = effect(() => {
    console.log('counter changed', counter());
}, { defer: true, async: true });
```

> ## Using Signals in Components

Reviewer 2: must be sentence case
```suggestion
## Using signals in components
```

> ### @signalAware directive

Reviewer 2: If you decide to remove the `## Using signals in components` section, then change header of this section from `###` to `##`
```suggestion
### @signalAware directive
```

Author: Do you mean also dropping 
```
## Implementation of Signals in Oryx
```
and raise all ### to ##?

Reviewer 2: "## Implementation of Signals in Oryx" has a description so you can leave it

Author: Decided to add description also to the second ##, as removing it would break the whole structure (separate directives are not on the same level as Singals in Oryx)

The `@signalAware` decorator provides additional functionality when using signals in components.

```ts
@signalAware()
class MyComponent extends LitElement {}
```

This decorator is required to make your component work with signals as expected.
When used, the component will automatically detect signals and render changes whenever a signal alters. It does this intelligently, considering only the signals relevant to the last render.

Some Oryx domain components are not using this decorator directly, as it is already applied to some common domain mixins (eg. `ContentMixin`, `ProductMixin`, etc.).

> ### `@elementEffect` Directive

Reviewer 2: Same here: sentence case + heading level
```suggestion
### `@elementEffect` directive
```

The `@elementEffect` directive integrates effects with component lifecycles for seamless management. It activates an effect when a component is connected to the DOM and deactivates it once the component is disconnected.

```ts
class MyComponent extends LitElement {
  /* ... */  
  @elementEffect()
  logProductCode = () => console.log('Product code ', this.$product().code);
}
```

> In the above example, the `logProductCode` effect will automatically start when `MyComponent` is connected to the DOM, logging the product code everytime $product signal will update. Once the component is disconnected from the DOM, the effect will automatically stop. This directive simplifies effect management by automatically linking them to component lifecycles, making your component code cleaner and easier to manage.

Reviewer 2: In general, avoid future tenses as much as possible. Also, this sentence looks unclear, so consider rephrasing or splitting it into two smaller ones: "In the preceding example, the `logProductCode` effect automatically starts when `MyComponent` is connected to the DOM, logging the product code every time, and the $product signal updates."
```suggestion
In the above example, the `logProductCode` effect starts automatically when `MyComponent` is connected to the DOM, logging the product code every time the $product signal updates. Once the component is disconnected from the DOM, the effect automatically stops. This directive simplifies effect management by automatically linking them to component lifecycles, making your component code cleaner and easier to manage.
```

Author: improved

---
title: [Add title; the file name and title must be identic]
description: [Add description]
template: concept-topic-template
last_updated: Jul 11, 2023
---

Signals offer a clean and efficient reactivity API for components in the Oryx framework. They allow for the declarative formulation of component logic while seamlessly integrating with observables from domain services.

## Implementation of signals in Oryx

The Oryx implementation of signals has a core mechanism and a simplified API. The core is well-suited for advanced usage, while the simplified API is sufficiently robust for most components. This document focuses on the simplified API.

### Creating signals

To create a signal, use the `signal()` function. This function can either take a raw value or accept an observable.

Here's an example of creating a simple signal:

```ts
const counter = signal(1);
```

Changing the signal value:

```ts
counter.set(2);
```

Creating a signal from an observable:

```ts
const values = signal(observable$);
```

You can initialize signals with options to adjust their behavior:

> - `equal`: allows for a custom equality function between two consecutive signal values. By default, strict comparison is used. Implementing your own function gives control over when a signal updates, avoiding unnecessary updates and performance costs when new and old values are practically identical.

Reviewer 3: `gives control over when a signal updates` Please clarify the meaning of this or update this sentence to improve clarity

Reviewer: I've updated the docs with a slightly different intro to the signal topic and a small tweak in the text above.
